there ought to be three debates between
the presidential candidates and one
between the vice presidential candidates
all are being arranged by the League of
Women Voters education fund tonight's
debate the first between presidential
candidates in 16 years and the first
ever in which an incumbent president has
participated is taking place before an
audience in the Walnut Street Theatre in
Philadelphia just three blocks from
Independence Hall the television
audience may reach a hundred million in
the United States and many millions
overseas tonight's debate focuses on
domestic issues and economic policy
questions will be put by Frank Reynolds
of ABC News James Gannon of The Wall
Street Journal and Elizabeth drew of The
New Yorker magazine under the agreed
rules the first question will go to
Governor Cotter
that was decided by the toss of a coin
he will have up to three minutes to
answer one follow up question will be
permitted with up to two minutes to
reply President Ford will then have two
minutes to respond the next question
will go to President Ford with the same
time arrangements and questions will
continue to be alternated between the
candidates each man will make a
three-minute statement at the end
governor Carter to go first President
Ford and governor Carter do not have any
notes or prepared remarks with them this
evening mr. Reynolds your question for
governor Carter mr. president governor
Carter governor in an interview with The
Associated Press last week you said you
believe these debates would alleviate a
lot of concern that some voters have
about you well one of those concerns not
an uncommon one about candidates in any
year is that many voters say they don't
really know where you stand now if you
have made jobs your number one priority
and you have said you are committed to a
drastic reduction in unemployment can
you say now governor in specific terms
what your first step would be next
January if you are elected to achieve
that yes
first of all is to recognize a
tremendous economic strength of his
country
and to set the putting back to work of
our people as a top priority this is an
effort that ought to be done primarily
by strong leadership in the white house
the inspiration of our people the
tapping our business agricultural
industry labor and government at all
levels to work on this project will
never have an end to the inflationary
spiral and will never have a balanced
budget until we get our people back to
work there are several things that can
be done specifically they've not now
being done first of all to channel
research and development funds into
areas that will provide large numbers of
jobs secondly we need to have a
commitment in the private sector to
cooperate with government in matters
like housing they are very small
investment of taxpayers money and the
housing field can bring large numbers of
extra jobs in the guarantee of mortgage
loans and they are putting forward off
our 202 programs for housing for older
people in so forth to cut down the
roughly 20% unemployment that now exists
in the construction industry another
thing is to deal with our needs in the
central cities where the unemployment
rate is extremely high
sometimes among minority groups are
those who don't speak English or who are
black young people or 40% unemployment
here a CCC type program would be
appropriate to channel money into the
chant into this sharing with private
sector and also local and state
governments to employ young people who
are now out of work another very
important aspect of our economy would be
to increase production in every way
possible to hold down our taxes on
individuals and to shift the tax burdens
onto those who have avoided paying taxes
in the past these are kinds of specific
things none of which are being done now
would be a great help in in reducing
unemployment there is
an additional factor that needs to be
done and covered very very succinctly
and that is to make sure that we have a
good relationship between management
business on the one hand and labor on
the other in a lot of places where
unemployment is very high we might
channel specific targeted jogging job
opportunities by paying part of the
salary of unemployed people and also
sharing with local government co-payment
of salaries which would let us cut down
the unemployment rate much lower before
we hit the inflationary level but I
believe that by the end of the first
four years of the next term we can have
the unemployment rate down to three
percent adult unemployment which is
about four to four and a half percent
overall or controlled inflation rate and
have a balance of growth of about four
to six percent around five percent which
would give us a balanced budget governor
in the event you are successful and you
to achieve a drastic drop in
unemployment that is likely to create
additional pressure on prices how
willing are you to consider an incomes
policy in other words wage and price
controls well we now have such a low
utilization of our productive capacity
about 73 percent annexed about the
lowest since the Great Depression years
and such a high unemployment right now
7.9 percent that we have a long way to
go
in getting people to work before we have
the inflationary pressures and I think
this would would be easy to accomplish
to get jobs down without having this
strong inflationary pressures that that
would be necessary I would not favor the
payment of a given fixed income the
people unless they are not able to work
but with tax incentives for the low
income groups we could build up their or
income levels above the poverty level to
not make welfare more
Oh profitable than than work mr.
president you're a response I don't
believe that mr. Carter's did any more
specific in this case and he has been on
many other instances I noticed
particularly that he didn't endorse the
humphrey-hawkins bill which he has on
occasions and which is included as a
part of the Democratic platform that
legislation allegedly would help our
unemployment but we all know that it
would have controlled our economy it
would have added 10 to 30 billion
dollars each year in additional
expenditures by the federal government
it would have called for export controls
on agricultural products in my judgment
the best way to get the jobs is to
expand the private sector we're five out
of six jobs today exist in our economy
we can do that by reducing federal taxes
as I proposed about a year ago when I
call for a tax reduction of twenty eight
billion dollars three-quarters of it to
go to private taxpayers in one quarter
to the business sector we could add two
jobs in the major metropolitan areas by
a proposal that I recommended that would
give tax incentives to business to move
into the inner city and to expand or to
build new plants so that they would take
a plant or expand the plant where people
are and people are currently unemployed
we could also help our youth with some
of the proposals that would give to
young people an opportunity to work and
learn at the same time just like we give
money to young people who are going to
college those are the kind of specifics
that I think we have to discuss on these
debates and these are the kind of
programs that I'll talk about on my time
mr. Ghanim your question to President
Ford mr. president I would like to
continue for a moment on this question
of taxes which you have just raised you
have said that you favor more tax cuts
for middle income Americans even though
is earning up to $30,000 a year that
presumably would cost the Treasury quite
a bit of money in lost revenue in view
of the very large budget deficits that
you have accumulated and that are still
in prospect how is it possible to
promise further tax cuts and to reach
your goal of balancing the budget at the
time Mr Gannon that I made the
recommendation for a twenty eight
billion dollar tax cut three-quarters of
it to go to individual taxpayers and 25%
to American business I said at the same
time that we had to hold the lid on
federal spending that for every dollar
of a tax reduction we had to have an
equal reduction in federal expenditures
a one-for-one proposition and I
recommended that to the Congress with a
budget ceiling of 395 billion dollars
and that would have permitted us to have
a twenty eight billion dollar tax
reduction in my tax reduction program
for middle-income taxpayers I
recommended that the Congress increase
personal exemptions from $750 per person
to $1,000 per person that would mean of
course that for a family of four that
that family would have $1,000 more
personal exemption money that they could
span for their own purposes money that
the government wouldn't have to spend
but if we keep the lid on federal
spending which I think we can with the
help of the Congress we can justify
fully a twenty eight billion dollar tax
reduction in the budget that I submitted
to the Congress in January of this year
I recommended a 50% cutback in the rate
of growth of federal spending for the
last ten years the budget of the United
States has grown
from about 11% per year we can't afford
that kind of growth in federal spending
and in the budget that I recommended we
cut it in half
a growth rate of five to five and a half
percent with that kind of limitation on
federal spending we can fully justify
the tax reductions that I have proposed
and it seems to me with the stimulant of
more money in the hands of the taxpayer
and with more money in the hands of
business to expand to modernize to
provide more jobs our economy will be
stimulated so that we'll get more
revenue and we'll have a more prosperous
economy mr. president to follow up a
moment the Congress has passed a tax
bill which is before you now which did
not meet exactly the sort of outline
that you requested what is your
intention on that bill since it doesn't
meet your requirements do you plan to
sign that bill that tax bill does not
entirely meet the criteria that I
established I think the Congress should
have added another ten billion dollar
reduction in personal income taxes
including the increase of personal
exemptions from 750 to $1,000 and
Congress could have done that if the
budget Committees of the Congress and
the Congress as a whole had not
increased the spending that I
recommended in the budget I'm sure you
know that in the resolutions passed by
the Congress they have added about 17
billion dollars in more spending by the
Congress over the budget that I
recommended so I would prefer in that
tax bill to have an additional tax cut
and a further limitation on federal
spending
now this tax bill that hasn't reached
the White House yet but is expected in a
day or two it's about 1,500 pages it
has some good provisions in it it has
left out some that I have recommended
unfortunately on the other hand when you
have a bill of that magnitude with those
many provisions a president has to sit
and decide if there's more good than bad
and from the analysis that I've made so
far it seems to me that that tax bill
does justify my signature and my
approval
coming to Connor your response well mr.
Porter's is a changing considerably his
previous philosophy the present tax
structure is a disgrace to this country
it's just a welfare program for the rich
as a matter of fact 25% of a total tax
deductions go up only 1% of the richest
people in this country and over 50% of
attacks or credits go for the 14% of the
richest people in this country but mr.
Ford first became president in August of
1974 the first thing he did in in
October was asked for a four point seven
billion dollar increase in taxes on our
people in the midst of the heaviest
recession since so since the Great
Depression of 1919 40s and January of
1975 he asked for tax change a five
point six billion dollar increase on low
and middle income private individuals a
six and a half billion dollar decrease
on the corporations in the special
interest in December of 1975 he vetoed
the rough the eighteen or twenty two
billion dollar tax reduction bill that
had been passed by the Congress and then
he came back later on in January of this
year he did advocate a ten billion
dollar tax reduction but it would be
offset by a six billion dollar increase
this coming January in deductions for
Social Security payments and for
unemployment compensation the whole
philosophy of the Republican Party
including my opponent has been to pile
on taxes for low-income people to take
them all on the corporation's as a
matter of fact and since since the late
60s when mr. Nixon took office we've had
a reduction in
and the percentage of taxes paid by
corporation from 30 percent down to
about 20 percent we've had an increase
in taxes paid by individuals payroll
taxes from 14 percent up to 20 percent
and this is what the Republicans have
done to it and this is why tech reform
is so important this is drew your
question to Governor Carter
governor Carter you've proposed a number
of new or enlarged programs including
jobs health welfare reform child care
aid to education aid to cities changes
in Social Security and housing subsidies
you've also said that you want to
balance the budget by the end of your
first term now you haven't put a price
tag on those programs but even if we
price them conservatively and we count
for full employment by the end of your
first term and we count for the economic
growth it would occur during that period
there still isn't enough money to pay
for those programs and balance the
budget by any any estimates that I've
been able to see so in that case what
would give what's a matter of fact there
is
if of our economy equivalent to what it
was during President Johnson President
Kennedy even before they walked all
Vietnamese war and if we assume that at
the end of the four-year period we can
cut our unemployment rate down to four
to four and a half percent under those
circumstances even assuming no
elimination of unnecessary programs and
assuming an increase in the admin the
allotment of money to finance programs
increasing as the inflation rate does my
economic projections I think confirmed
by the House and the Senate committees
have been with a sixty billion dollar
extra amount of money that can be spent
in fiscal year 81 which be the last year
of his next term within that sixty
billion dollars increase that would
befit the programs that I promised to
American people I might say to that if
we see that these goals cannot be
reached and I believe there are
reasonable goals then I would cut back
on the rate of implement the
implementation of new programs in order
to accommodate a balanced budget by
fiscal year 81 which is the last year
the next term I believe that we ought to
have a balanced budget during normal
economic circumstances and these
projections have been very carefully
made I stand behind them and if they
should be an error slightly on the
downside then I'll phase in the programs
that we've advocated
more slowly the governor according to
the budget committees of the Congress
that that you referred to if we get to
full employment what they project at a
four percent unemployment and as you say
even allowing for the inflation in the
programs there would not be anything
more than a surplus of five billion
dollars by the end of night by 1981 and
conservative estimates of your programs
would be that they'd be about 85 to a
hundred billion dollars so how do you
say that you're going to be able to do
these things and balance the budget well
the the assumption that you all have
described it's different is in the rate
of growth of our economy they took that
into account because I believe that it's
hard to say that the committee's to whom
you refer
with the unemployment rate that you
state and with a five to five and a half
percent growth rate in our economy that
the projections would be a sixty billion
dollar increase in the amount of money
that we have to spend in 1981 compared
to now and with that in that framework
would be fit they any improvements in
the programs now this does not include
now any extra control over unnecessary
spending they're weeding out of obsolete
or obsolescent programs we'll have a
safety version built in with complete
reorganization of the executive branch
of government which I am pledged to do
the present bureaucratic structure of
the of the federal governor's a mess
and if I'm elected president that's
gonna be a top priority Amanda
completely revised the structure of the
federal government to make it economical
efficient purposeful and manageable for
a change and also I'm going to Institute
zero based budgeting which I used for
years in Georgia which assesses every
program every year and eliminates those
programs for the obsolete or
obsolescence but with these projections
we will have a balanced budget by fiscal
year 1981 if I'm elected president keep
my promises to the American people and
it's just predicated on very modest but
I think I could projections of
employment increases and a growth in our
national economy equal to of what was
experienced on the kennedys Johnson
before the Vietnam War President Ford if
it is true that there will be a sixty
billion dollar surplus by fiscal year
1981 rather than spend that money for
all the new programs that governor
Carter recommends and endorses and which
are included in the Democratic platform
I think the American taxpayer ought to
get an additional tax break a tax
reduction of that magnitude I feel that
the taxpayers are the ones that need the
relief I don't think we should add
additional programs of the magnitude
that Governor Carter talks about it
seems to me that our tax structure today
has rates that are too high but I am
very glad to point out that since 1969
during a Republican administrations we
have had 10 million people taken off of
the tax rolls at the lower end of the
taxpayer area and at the same time
assuming that I sign the tax bill that
was mentioned by mr. Gannon we will in
the last two tax bills have increased
the minimum tax on all wealthy taxpayers
and I believe that by eliminating 10
million tax payers in the last eight
years and by putting a heavier tax
burden on those in the higher tax
brackets plus the other actions that
have been taken we can give tax payers
adequate tax relief now it seems to me
that as we look at the recommendations
of the budget committees and our own
projections there isn't going to be any
sixty billion dollar dividend I've heard
of those dividends in the past it always
happens we expected one at the time of
the Vietnam War but it was used up
before we ever ended the war and
taxpayers never got the adequate relief
they deserved mr. Reynolds mr. president
when you came into office you spoke very
eloquently of the need for a time for
healing and very early in your
administration he went out to Chicago
and you announced you proposed a program
of case-by-case pardons for draft
resisters to restore them to full
citizenship some 14,000 young men took
advantage of your offer but another
90,000 did not in granting the pardon to
former President Nixon sir part of your
rationale was to put Watergate behind us
- if I may quote you again truly end our
long national nightmare why does not the
same rationale apply now today in our
bicentennial year - the young man who
justed in vietnam and many of them still
in exile abroad the amnesty program that
I recommended in Chicago in September of
1974 would give to all draft evaders and
military deserters the opportunity to
earn their good record back about 14 to
15 thousand did take advantage of that
program we gave them ample time I am
against a an across-the-board pardon of
draft evaders or military deserters now
in the case of mr. Nixon the reason that
the pardon was given was that when I
took office this country was in a very
very divided condition there was hatred
there was divisive Nastase in their
government in many many respects mr.
Nixon resigned and I became president it
seemed to me that if I was to adequately
and effectively handle the problems of
high inflation a growing recession the
involvement of the United States still
in Vietnam that I had to give a hundred
percent of my time to those two major
problems mr. Nixon resigned that is
disgrace the first president out of 38
that ever resigned from public office
under pressure so when you look at the
penalty that he paid and when you
analyze the requirements that I had to
spend all of my time working on the
economy which was in trouble that I
inherited working on our problems in
Southeast Asia which were still plaguing
us it seemed to me that mr. Nixon had
been penalized enough by his resignation
in disgrace and the need necessity for
me to concentrate on the problems of the
country fully justified the action that
I took
I'll take it then sir that you do not
believe that it is that you are going to
reconsider and think about those 90,000
who are still abroad have they not been
penalized enough many of them been there
for years mr. Carter has indicated that
he would give a blanket pardon to all
draft debaters I do not agree with that
point of view I gave in September of
1974 an opportunity for all draft
evaders all deserters to come in
voluntarily clear their records by
earning an opportunity to restore their
good citizenship I think we gave them a
good opportunity where I don't think we
should go any further
coming to Cotter well I think it's
very difficult for President Ford to
explain the difference between the part
of President Nixon and his attitude
toward those who violated the draft laws
as a matter of fact no I don't advocate
amnesty I advocate pardon as a
difference in my opinion and in the
courts for the ruling of the Supreme
Court and according to the definition in
the dictionary
amnesty means that that you all quit
there what you did was right
pardon means what you did whether it's
right or wrong you're forgiven for it
and I do advocate a pardon for for draft
evaders
I think it's accurate to say that in two
years ago when mr. Nixon mr. Ford put in
this amnesty that three times as many
deserters world excused as well as were
they you know the ones who evaded the
draft but I think that now is the time
to heal our country after the Vietnam
War and I think that what the people are
concerned about is not the pardon or the
amnesty for those who evaded the draft
but whether or not our crime system is
is failed
we've got a short distinction drawn
between white-collar crime the the big
shot to a rich or influential or a very
simple go to jail those who are poor and
who have by no influence or quite often
the ones who are punished and and the
whole subject of crime is one that
concerns our people very much and I
believe that the fairness of it is what
or is it it's a major problem that
addresses our a leader and this is
something that hasn't been addressed
adequately by by this administration but
I hope to have a complete responsibility
on my shoulders to help bring about a
fair criminal justice system and also to
bring about an end to the device
divisive miss that has occurred in our
country as a result of the Vietnam War
mr. Gannon Governor Carter you have
promised a sweeping overhaul of the
federal government including a reduction
of the number of government agencies you
say it would go down to about 200 from
some 1,900 that sounds indeed like a
very deep cut in the federal government
but isn't it a fact that you're not
really talking about fewer federal
employees or less government spending
but rather that you are talking about
reshaping the federal government not
making it smaller well I've been through
this before mr. Gannon there's a
governor of Georgia when I took over we
had a bureaucratic mess like we haven't
washed them now and we had 300 agencies
departments bureaus commissions of some
fully budgeted some not but all having
responsibility to carry out there was in
conflict and we cut those 300 agencies
and so forth down substantially we
eliminated 278 of them we set up a
simple structure of government there
could be administered fairly and it was
a tremendous success it hasn't been
undone since I was there it resulted
also in an ability to reshape our court
system a prison system our education
system our mental health programs and a
clear assignment of responsibility and
an authority and also to have our people
once again understanding control our
government I intend to do the same thing
if I'm elected president when I get to
Washington coming in as an outsider one
of the major responsibilities that I
will have on my shoulder there's a
complete reorganization of us of the
executive branch of government we now
have a greatly expanded White House
staff when mr. Nixon went in office for
instance we had three and a half million
dollars spent on the White House and his
staff that has escalated now to 16 and a
half million dollars in the last
Republican administration this needs to
be changed we need to put the
responsibilities back on the cabinet
members we also need to have a great
reduction in agencies and programs for
instance we now have in the health area
302 different
administered by 11 major departments and
agencies 60 other advisory Commission's
responsible for this Medicaid's in one
agency Medicare's on a different one to
check on the quality of health care in a
different one none of them are
responsible for health care itself this
makes it almost impossible for us to
have a good health program we have just
advocated this past week a consolidation
of the responsibilities for energy our
country now has no comprehensive energy
program of policy we have 20 different
agencies in the federal government
responsible for the production the
regulation the information about energy
the conservation of energy spread all
over government this is a gross waste of
money so tough competent management of
government giving us a simple efficient
purposeful and manageable government
will be a great step forward and if I'm
elected and I intend to be then it's
gonna be done well I'd like to to press
my question on the number of federal
employees whether you would really plan
to reduce the overall number or merely
put them in different departments and
relabeled them in your energy plan you
consolidate a number of it agencies into
one or you would but does that really
change the overall I can't say for sure
that we would have pure federal
employees when I go out of office say
when I come in it took me about three
years to completely reorganize the
Georgia government the last year I was
in office our budget was was actually
less than it was a year before which
showed a great improvement also we had a
2% increase in the number of employees
last year but it was a tremendous shift
from administrative jobs into the
delivery of services for instance we are
completely revised our prison system we
established 84 new mental health
treatment centers and we shifted people
out of administrative jobs into the
field to deliver better services the
same thing will be done at the federal
government level I accomplished this
with substantial reductions in employee
in some departments for instance in the
transportation department we had we cut
back about 25 percent of total number of
employees and giving our people better
mental health care we increase the
number of employees but the efficiency
of it the simplicity of it the ability
of people to understand their own
government and control it was it was the
substantial benefit derived from
complete reorganization we have got to
do this at the federal government level
if we don't the bureaucratic mess is
going to continue there's no way for our
people now to understand what their
government is there's no way to get the
answer to a question when you come to
Washington to try to as a governor to
try to begin a new program for you
people like grow the treatment of drug
addicts I found there were 13 different
federal agencies that I had to go to to
manage the drug treatment program in the
Georgia government we only had one
agency responsible for drug treatment
this is a kind of change that would be
made and it would be a tremendous
benefit in long-range planning and tight
budgeting or saving the taxpayers money
making the government more efficient
cutting down on bureaucratic waste have
an accredited lineage of authority and
responsibilities of employees and giving
our people a better chance to understand
and control the government President
Ford I think the record should show mr.
Newman that the Bureau of census we
checked it just yesterday indicates that
in the four years that governor Carter
was governor of the state of Georgia
expenditures by the government went up
over 50% employees of the government of
Georgia during his term of office went
up over 25% and the figures also show
that the bonded indebtedness of the
state of Georgia during his governorship
went up over 20% and there was some very
interesting testimony given by Governor
Carter's successor governor Busbee
before a Senate committee a few months
ago on how he found the Medicaid program
when he came into office following the
governor Carter
he testified and these are his words the
present governor of Georgia he says he
found the Medicaid program in Georgia in
shambles now let me talk about what
we've done in the White House as far as
federal employees are concerned the
first order that I issued after I became
president was to cut or eliminate the
prospective 40,000 increase in federal
employees that had been scheduled by my
predecessor and in the term that I've
been president some two years we have
reduced federal employment by 11,000 in
the White House staff itself when I
became president we had roughly 540
employees we now have about 485
employees so we've made a rather
significant reduction in the number of
employees and the White House staff
working for the president so I think our
record of cutting back employees plus
the failure on the part of the
governor's program to actually save
employment in Georgia shows which is the
better plan mrs. drew mr. president at
Vail after the Republican convention you
announced that you would now emphasize
five new areas among those with jobs and
housing and health improved recreational
facilities for Americans and you also
added crime he also mentioned education
for two years you've been telling us
that we couldn't do very much in these
areas because we couldn't afford it and
in fact we do have a 50 billion dollar
deficit now in rebuttal to Governor
Carter a little bit earlier you said
that if there were to be any surplus in
the next few years you thought it should
be turned back to the people in the form
of tax relief so how are you going to
pay for any new initiatives in these
areas you announced it Vail you were
going to now stress well in the last two
years as I indicated before we had a
very tough time we were faced with
heavy inflation over 12% we were faced
with substantial unemployment but in the
last 24 months we've turned the economy
around and we've brought inflation down
to under 6% and we have reduced the well
we have added employment of about 4
million in the last 17 months to the
point where we have 88 million people
working in America today the most in the
history of the country the net result is
we are going to have some improvement in
our receipts and I think we'll have some
decrease in our disbursements we expect
to have a lower deficit in fiscal year
1978 we feel that with this improvement
in the economy we feel with more
receipts and fewer disbursements we can
in a moderate way increase as I
recommend it over the next 10 years a
new parks program that would cost a
billion and a half dollars doubling our
National Park System we have recommended
that in the housing program we can
reduce down payments and moderate
monthly payments but that doesn't cost
anymore as far as the federal Treasury
is concerned we believe that we can do a
better job in the area of crime but that
requires tougher sentencing mandatory
certain prison sentences for those who
violate our criminal laws we believe
that you can revise the federal criminal
code which has not been revised in a
good many years that doesn't cost any
more money we believe that you can do
something more effectively with a
moderate increase in money in the drug
abuse program we feel that in education
we can have a slight increase not a
major increase it's my understanding
that governor Carter has indicated that
he approves of a 30 billion dollar
expenditure by the federal government as
far as education is concerned the
present time we're spending roughly
three billion five hundred million
dollars I don't know where that money
would come from but as we look at the
quality of life programs jobs health
education crime recreation we feel that
as we move forward with a healthier
economy we can absorb the small
necessary cost that will be required sir
in the next few years would you try to
reduce the deficit would you spend money
for these programs that you have just
outlined or would you as you said
earlier return whatever surplus you got
to the people in the form of tax relief
we feel that with the programs that I
have recommended the additional 10
billion dollar tax cut with the moderate
increases in the quality of life area we
can still have a balanced budget which I
will submit to the Congress in January
of 1978 we won't wait one year or two
years longer as governor Carter
indicates as the economy improves and it
is improving our gross national product
this year will average about six percent
increase over last year we will have a
lower rate of inflation for the calendar
year this year of something slightly
under six percent employment will be up
revenues will be up we'll keep the lid
on some of these programs that we can
hold down as we have a little extra
money to spend for those quality of life
programs which I think are needed and
necessary now I cannot and would not
endorse the kind of programs that
Governor Carter recommends he endorses
the Democratic platform which is I read
it calls for approximately 60
additional programs we estimate that
those programs would add a hundred
billion dollars minimum and probably 200
billion dollars maximum each year to the
federal budget those programs you cannot
afford and give tax relief we feel that
you can hold the line and restrain
federal spending give a tax reduction
and still have a balanced budget by 1978
coming to Cotter
well mr. fuller takes the same attitude
that the Republicans always take in the
last three months before an election
they're always for the programs that
they fight the other three and a half
years
I remember when Herbert Hoover was
against jobs for people and when out
Blandon was against Social Security and
later President Nixon sixteen years ago
was telling their public that john
kennedy's proposals would bankrupt the
country and the doubled cost the best
thing to do is to look at the record of
mr. Ford's administration and mr.
Nixon's before his we had last year 65
billion dollar deficit the largest
deficit in the history of our country
more of a deficit spending that we had
in the entire eight-year period under
President Johnson and President Kennedy
we've got 500,000 more Americans out of
jobs a day they were out of work three
months ago
and since mr. Ford's been in office in
two years we've had a 50% increase in
unemployment from five million people
out of work to two and a half million
more people that have worked a total of
seven and a half million we've also got
a comparison between himself and mr.
Nixon he's got four times the size of
the deficits that mr. Nixon even had
himself this talking about more people
at work it's distorted because with a
14% increase in the cost of living in
the last two years it means it that
women and young people have had to go to
work when they didn't want to because
their fathers couldn't make enough to
pay the increased cost of food and
housing and clothing we have in this
last two years alone a hundred and
twenty billion dollars total
deficits under present forward and at
the same time we've had in the last
eight years a doubling in the number of
bankruptcies for small business we've
had a negative growth in our national
economy measured in real dollars the
take-home pay of a worker in this
country is actually less now than it was
in 1968 measured in real dollars this is
a kind of record that's there and talk
about the future and a drastic change or
conversion on the part of mr. Ford in
the last minute is one it just doesn't
go mr. Reynolds
governor Carter I'd like to turn to what
we used to call the energy crisis
yesterday a pretty sure government
Commission's on air pollution but one
headed by a nuclear physicist
recommended that any further expansion
of nuclear energy be delayed in Britain
as long as possible now this is a
subject that is quite controversial
among our own people and there seems to
be a clear difference between you and
the President on the use of nuclear
power plants would you say you would use
as the last priority why Sir are they
unsafe well one my other experiences in
the past I've been a nuclear engineer
and did graduate work in this field I
think I know that the your capabilities
and limitations of atomic power but the
energy policy of our nation is one that
has not yet been established under this
administration I think almost every
other developed nation in the world has
an energy policy except to us we have
seen the Federal Energy Agency
established for instance in the crisis
of 1973 but supposed to be a temporary
agency now it's permanent its enormous
it's growing every day
I think The Wall Street Journal reported
not too long ago they have 112 public
relations experts working for the
Federal Energy Agency to try to justify
that American people its own existence
we've got to have a firm way to handle
the energy question the reorganization
proposal that effort for is one our
first step in addition to that we need
to have a realization that we've got a
about 35 years worth of all left in the
whole world
we're gonna run out of oil but mr. Nixon
made his famous speech on Operation
independence we were importing about 35%
of our oil now we've increased that
amount 25% we now import about 44
percent of our leadership from all the
coal we need to concentrate our research
and development effort on our coal
burning and extraction that's safer -
that also is clean burning we need to
shift very strongly toward solar energy
and have strict conservation measures
and then as a last resort only continue
to use atomic power I would certainly
not cut out a Tommy power altogether we
can't afford to give up that opportunity
until later but to the extent that we
continue to use atomic power I would be
responsible as president to make sure
that the safety precautions were
initiated and maintained for instance
some that have been forgotten we need to
have the reactor core below ground level
the entire power plant that uses a tummy
Powell
tightness sealed in a heavy heavy vacuum
maintained there to be a standardized
design there ought to be a full-time
atomic energy specialist independent of
power come in the control room full time
24 hours a day to shut down a plant of
an abnormality develops these cancer
four procedures along with evacuation
procedures adequate insurance ought to
be initiated so shift from all the coal
emphasized research and development on
coal use and also on solar power strict
conservation measures not yield every
time that the special interest groups
put pressure on the present like this
administration has done and use atomic
energy only as a last resort with the
strictest possible safety precautions
that's the best overall energy policy in
the brief time we have a discussion well
governor on that same subject would you
require mandatory conservation efforts
to try to conserve fuel yes I would some
of the things that can be done about
this as a change in the rate structure
of electric power companies we are now
encouraged people to waste electricity
and by giving the lowest rates to the
biggest users we don't do anything to
cut down on peak load requirements we
don't have an adequate requirement for
the insulation of homes for the
efficiency of automobiles and whenever
they are automobile manufactures come
forward so they can't meet the limits
that the Congress has put forward this
Republican administration has delayed
the implementation date in addition to
that we ought to have a shift to the use
of coal particularly Appalachian regions
where the coal is located a lot of very
high quality low carbon coal I mean low
sulfur coal to sale it's where our
employment is needed this would would
help a great deal
so mandatory conservation measures yes
encouragement by the president for
people to voluntarily conserved yes and
also the private sector ought to be
encouraged to to bring forward to the
public the benefits from efficiency one
bank in Washington for instance gives
lower interest loans for people who
adequately insulate their homes and who
by efficient automobiles and some major
manufacturing companies like dark
chemical have through very effective
efficiency mechanisms cut down the use
of energy by as much as 40 percent with
the same out product these kinds of
things ought to be done or they ought to
be encouraged and supported and even
required by the government yes President
Ford governor Carter skims over a very
serious and a very broad subject in
January of 1975 I submitted to the
Congress and to the American people the
first comprehensive energy program
recommended by any president it called
for an increase in the production of
energy in the United States it called
for conservation measures so that we
would save the energy that we have
if you're going to increase domestic oil
and gas production and we have to you
have to give to those producers an
opportunity to develop their land or
their wells I recommended to the
Congress that we should increase coal
production in this country from 600
million tons a year to 12 billion 200
million tons by 1985 in order to do that
we have to improve our extraction of
coal from the ground we have to improve
our utilization of coal make it more
efficient make it cleaner in addition we
have to expand our research and
development in my program for energy
independence we have increased for
example solar energy research from about
84 million dollars a year to about 120
million dollars a year we're going as
fast as the experts say we should in
nuclear power we have increased the
research and development under the
energy research and development agency
very substantially to ensure that our
nuclear power plants are safer that they
are more efficient and that we have
adequate safeguards I think you have to
have greater oil and gas production more
coal production more nuclear production
and in addition you have to have energy
conservation mr. Ghanim mr. president
I'd like to return for a moment to this
problem of unemployment you have vetoed
or threatened to veto number of jobs
bills passed or in development in the
Democratic Congress
democratic-controlled Congress yet at
the same time the government is paying
out I think it is 17 billion perhaps 20
billion dollars a year in unemployment
compensation caused by the high
unemployment why do you think it is
better to pay out unemployment
compensation to idle people than to put
them to work in public service jobs
the bills that I've vetoed the one for
an additional six billion dollars was
not a bill that would have solved our
unemployment problems even the
proponents of it admitted that no more
than 400,000 jobs would be made
available our analysis indicates that
something in the magnitude of about a
hundred and fifty to two hundred
thousand jobs would be made available
each one of those jobs would have cost
the taxpayer twenty five thousand
dollars in addition the jobs would not
be available right now they would not
have materialized for about nine to
eighteen months
the immediate problem we have is to
stimulate our economy now so that we can
get rid of unemployment what we have
done is to hold the lid on spending in
an effort to reduce the rate of
inflation and we have proven I think
very conclusively that you can reduce
the rate of inflation and increase jobs
for example as I have said we have added
some four million jobs in the last 17
months we have now employed 88 million
people in America the largest number in
the history of the United States we've
added 500,000 jobs in the last two
months inflation is the quickest way to
destroy jobs and by holding the lid on
federal spending we have been able to do
in a good job an affirmative job in
inflation and as a result have added to
the jobs in this country I think it's
also appropriate to point out that
through our tax policies we have
stimulated added employment throughout
the country the investment tax credit
the tax incentives for expansion and
modernization of
industrial capacity it's my my opinion
that the private sector were five out of
the six jobs are where you have
permanent jobs with the opportunity for
advancement is a better place than
make-work jobs under the program
recommended by the Congress just
follow-up mr. president the Congress has
just passed a 3.7 billion dollar
appropriation bill which would provide
money for the Public Works jobs program
that you earlier tried to kill by your
veto of the authorization legislation in
light of the fact that unemployment
again is rising or has in the past three
months I wonder if you have rethought
that question at all whether you would
consider allowing this program to be
funded or will you veto that money bill
well that bill has not yet come down to
the Oval Office so I am not in the
position to make any judgment on it
tonight but that is an extra four
billion dollars that would add to the
deficit which would add to the
inflationary pressures which would help
to destroy jobs in the private sector
not make jobs where the jobs really are
these make work temporary jobs dead-end
as they are are not the kind of jobs
that we want for our people I think it's
interesting to point out that in the two
years that I've been president I vetoed
56 bills Congress has sustained 42
vetoes as a result we have saved over
nine billion dollars in federal
expenditures and the Congress by
overriding the bills that I did veto the
Congress has added some thirteen billion
dollars to the federal expenditures and
to the federal deficit now governor
Carter complains about the deficits that
this administration has had and yet he
condemns the vetoes that I have made
that his that have saved the taxpayer
nine billion dollars and could have
saved an additional 13 billion dollar
now he can't have it both ways and
therefore it seems to me that we should
hold the lid as we have to the best of
our ability so we can stimulate the
private economy and get the jobs where
the jobs are five out of six in this
economy
governor Carter well mr. Ford doesn't
seem to put into perspective the fact
that when when five hundred thousand
more people are out of work than there
were three months ago we have two and a
half million more people out of work
than when he took office that this
touches human beings I was in our city
in Pennsylvania not too long ago and
they're here and there were about four
or five thousand people in the audience
it was on on the train trip and I said
how many adults are out of work
about a thousand raising hands the
support actually has fewer people now in
the private sector and non-farm jobs
than when he took office and still he
talks about our success 7.9 percent
unemployment is a terrible tragedy in
this country
he says he's learned how to match
unemployment with inflation that's right
we've got the highest inflation we've
had in 25 years right now
except under this administration and
that was 50 years ago and we've got the
highest unemployment we've had under mr.
Ford's administration since a Great
Depression
this affects human beings and and his
insensitivity in providing those people
a chance to work has made this a welfare
administration and not a work
administration he hasn't saved nine
billion dollars for this vetoes there's
only been a net saving a four billion
dollars and the cost in unemployment
compensation welfare compensation in
lost revenues has increased twenty three
billion dollars in the last two years
this is a typical attitude that really
causes havoc in people's lives and then
it's covered over by saying that our
country is naturally got a six percent
unemployment rate or seven percent
unemployment rate under six percent
inflation it
travesty it shows a lack of leadership
and we've never had a president since a
war between the states to DTOs more
bills mr. Fortas vetoed four times as
many bills with mr. Nixon per year and
eleven of them have been overwritten one
of his built it was overridden he only
got one vote in the Senate and seven
votes in the house for Republicans so
this shows a breakdown in leadership
under the rules I must stop you and mrs.
drew governor Carter I'd like to come
back to the subject of taxes you have
said that you want to cut taxes for the
middle and lower income group but unless
you're willing to do such things as
reduce the itemized deductions for
charitable contributions or home
mortgage payments for interests or taxes
or capital gains you can't really raise
sufficient revenue to provide an overall
tax cut of any size so how are you going
to provide the tax relief that you're
talking about
now we have such a grossly unbalanced
tax system as I said earlier that it is
a disgrace of all the tax benefits now
25% of them goes to the 1% of the
richest people in this country over
fifty percent fifty three to be exact
percent of the tax benefits go to the
14% richest people in this country and
we've had a 50% increase in payroll
deductions since mr. Nixon went in
office eight years ago mr. port has his
advocated since he's been in office over
five billion dollars in reductions for
corporations special interest groups and
the very very wealthy who derive their
income not from labor but from
investments coming back with that
million dollars in creating a shoe
factory say in New Hampshire Vermont if
the company takes the money down to it
Linux and build a shoe factory they
don't have to pay any taxes on the money
another thing is a system called disk
which was originally designed proposed
by mr. Nixon to encourage exports this
permits a company to create a dummy
corporation to export their products and
then not to pay the full amount of taxes
on them this cost our government about
1.4 billion dollars a year and when
those rich corporations don't pay that
tax
the average American taxpayer pays it
form another one that so that's very
important is the business deductions jet
airplanes
first-class travel the $50 martini lunch
the average working person can't uh
can't take advantage of that but the the
wealthier people are can another system
is well
a dentist can invest money and say
raising cattle and can put in $100,000
of his own money bought $900,000
$900,000 it makes a million and mark off
a great amount of loss through that
procedure oh there was one example for
instance where somebody produced
Phonographic movies they put in thirty
thousand dollars of their own money and
got a hundred twenty thousand dollars in
tax savings well these special kinds of
programs have have robbed the average
taxpayer and have benefited those who
are powerful and who can employ
lobbyists and you can have other CPAs
and the lawyers to help them benefit
from their roughly eight thousand pages
of attached code the average American
person can't do it you can't how
lobbyists out of for unemployment
compensation checks governor to follow
up on your answer in order for any kind
of tax relief to really be felt by the
middle and lower-income people you need
about according to congressional
committees on this you need about ten
billion dollars now you listed some
things the deferral on foreign income is
estimated I would save about five
hundred million dollars
disk you said was one point four billion
the estimate at the outside if you
eliminated all tax shelters is five
billion so where else would you raise
the revenue to provide this tax relief
would you in fact do away with all
business deductions and what other kinds
of preferences would you do away with no
I wouldn't do away with all our business
deductions I think that would be a very
serious mistake but if you could just do
away with the ones that are unfair you
could lower taxes for everyone I would
never do anything that would increase
the taxes for those who work for a
living or who are presently required to
list all their income but I want to do
is not to raise taxes but to eliminate
loopholes and this is the point of my
first statistic that I gave you that the
present tax benefits that have been
carved out over a long period of years
fifty years
by Sharp tax lawyers in vile obvious
have benefited just the rich
these programs that I described to you
earlier the tax deferrals for overseas a
disc and the tax shelters are they only
apply to people in the $50,000 year
bracket or up and I think this is the
best way to approach it is to make sure
that everybody pays taxes on the income
that they earn and make sure that you
take whatever savings is from the higher
income levels and give it to the lower
middle income families President Ford
governor Carter's answered tonight does
not coincide with the answer that he
gave in an interview to The Associated
Press a week or so ago in that interview
governor Carter indicated that he would
raise the taxes on those in the medium
or middle income brackets or higher
now if you take the medium or middle
income taxpayer that's about $14,000 per
person
governor Carter has indicated publicly
in an interview that he would increase
the taxes on about 50% of the working
people of this country I think the way
to get tax equity in this country is to
give tax relief to the middle income
people who have an income from roughly
$8,000 up to 25 or $30,000 they have
been shortchanged as we have taken ten
million taxpayers off the tax rolls in
the last eight years and as we have
added to the minimum tax provision to
make all people pay more taxes I believe
in tax equity for the middle-income
taxpayer increasing the personal
exemption mr. Carter wants to increase
taxes for roughly half of the taxpayers
of this country now the governor has
also played a little fast and loose with
the facts about vetoes the record show
the President Roosevelt vetoed on an
average of 55 bills a year President
Truman vetoed on the average while he
was president about 38 bills a years
I understand that Governor Carter when
he was governor of Georgia vetoed
between 35 and 40 bills a year my
average in two years is 26 but in the
process of that we have saved nine
billion dollars and one final comment
governor Carter talks about the tax
bills and all of the inequities that
exist in the present law I must remind
him the Democrats have controlled the
Congress for the last 22 years and they
wrote all the tax bills mr. Reynolds I
suspect that we could continue on this
tax argument for some time but I'd like
to move on to another area mr. president
everybody seems to be running against
Washington this year and I'd like to
raise two coincidental events that ask
you whether you think perhaps this may
have a bearing on the attitude
throughout the country the House Ethics
Committee has just now ended its
investigation of Daniel Schorr after
several months and many thousands of
dollars trying to find out how he
obtained and caused to be published a
report of the Congress that probably is
the property of the American people at
the same time the Senate Select
Committee on standards and conduct has
voted not really to begin an
investigation of a United States Senator
because of allegations against him that
he may have been receiving corporate
funds illegally over a period of years
do you suppose sir that events like this
contribute to the feeling in the country
that maybe there's something wrong in
Washington and I don't mean just in the
executive branch but throughout the
whole government there is a considerable
anti-washington feeling throughout the
country but I think the feeling is
misplaced in the last two years we have
restored integrity in the White House
and we've set high standards in the
executive branch of the government the
anti-washington feeling in my opinion
ought to be focused on the Congress of
the United States for example this
Congress very shortly will
spend a billion dollars a year for its
housekeeping its salaries its expenses
and the like it the next Congress will
probably be the first billion dollar
Congress in the history of the United
States I don't think the American people
are getting their money's worth from the
majority party that run this Congress we
in addition see that in the last four
years the number of employees hired by
the Congress has gone up substantial
much more than the gross national
product much more than any other
increase throughout our society Congress
is hiring people by the droves and the
cost as a result has gone up and I don't
see any improvement in the performance
of the Congress under the present
leadership so it seems to me instead of
the anti-washington feeling being aimed
at everybody in Washington it seems to
me that the focus should be where the
problem is which is the Congress of the
United States and particularly the
majority in the Congress they spend too
much money on themselves they have too
many employees there's some question
about their morality it seems to me that
in this election the focus should not be
on the executive branch but that
correction should come as the voters
vote for their members of the House of
Representatives or for their United
States Senator that's where the problem
is and I hope there will be some
corrective action taken so we can get
some new leadership in the Congress of
the United States mr. president if I may
follow up I think you've made it plain
that you take a dim view of the majority
in the Congress isn't it quite likely
sir that you will have a Democratic
Congress in the next session if you are
elected president and hasn't the country
a right to ask whether you can get along
with that Congress or whether we'll have
continued confrontation well it seems to
me that
we have a chance the Republicans to get
a majority in the House of
Representatives we will make some gains
in the United States Senate so there
will be different ratios in the house as
well as in the Senate and as president I
will be able to work with that Congress
but let me take the other side of the
coin if I might supposing we had had a
Democratic Congress for the last two
years and we had had governor Carter as
president he has in effect said that he
would agree with all of he would
disapprove of the vetoes that I have
made and would have added significantly
to expenditures in the deficit in the
federal government I think it would be
contrary to one of the basic concepts in
our system of government a system of
checks and balances we have a Democratic
Congress today and fortunately we've had
a Republican president to check their
excesses with my vetoes if we have a
Democratic Congress next year and a
president who wants to spend an
additional 100 billion dollars a year or
maybe 200 billion dollars a year with
more programs we will have in my
judgment greater deficits with more
spending more dangers of inflation I
think the American people want a
Republican president to check on any
excesses that come out of the next
Congress if it is a Democratic Congress
Governor Carter well it's not a matter
of Republican and Democrat it's a matter
of leadership or no leadership
President Eisenhower worked with a
Democratic Congress very well even
President Nixon because he was a strong
leader at least worked with the
Democratic Congress very well mr. Ford
is vetoed as I said earlier four times
as many bills for a year as mr. Nixon
mr. Ford quite often puts forward a
program this is a public relations stunt
and never tries to put it through the
Congress by working with the Congress I
think kind of present for Nixon and
Eisenhower they passed about 60 to 75%
of the legend
this year mr. Ford will not pass more
than 26% of all the legislative
proposals he puts forward this is
government by stalemate and we've seen
almost a complete breakdown in the
proper relationship between the
president who represents his country and
the Congress who collectively also
represent this country we've had
Republican presidents before who try to
run against a Democratic Congress and I
don't think it's so the Congress is mr.
Ford's opponent but if if he insists
that that I'd be responsible for the
Democratic Congress of which I have not
been a part then I think is only fair
that he be responsible for the Nixon
administration in its entirety of which
he was a part that I think is a good
balance but the point is that a
president ought to lead this country mr.
Ford so far as I know except for
avoiding another Watergate has not
accomplished one single major program
for this country and there's been a
constant squabbling between the
president and the Congress and that's
not the way this country ought to be run
I might go back to one other thing mr.
Fortas or misquoted an AP news story
there was an era to begin with that
story reported several times that I
would lower taxes for low and middle
income families and that correction was
delivered to the White House and I'm
sure that the president knows about this
or correction but he still insists on
repeating an erroneous statement
President Ford governor Carter we no
longer have enough time for two complete
sequences of questions we have only
about 6 minutes left for questions and
answers for that reason we will drop the
follow-up questions at this point but
each candidate will still be able to
respond to the others answers to the
extent that you can gentlemen please
keep your remarks brief mr. Gannon
Governor Carter one important part of
the government's economic policy
apparatus we haven't talked about is the
federal reserve board I'd like to ask
you something about what you've said and
that is that you believe that a
president ought to have a chairman the
Federals
board whose views are compatible with
his own based on the record with the
last few years would you say that your
views are compatible with those of
Chairman Arthur burns and if not would
you seek his resignation if you are
elected what I have said is that the
president ought to have a chance to
appoint the chairman of the Federal
Reserve Board to have a coterminous long
term in other words both of them served
the same for four years the Congress can
modify the supply of money by modifying
the income tax or laws the president can
modify the economic structure of the
country by public statements and general
attitudes and the budget that he
proposes the Federal Reserve has an
independent status that ought to be
preserved
I think mr. burns did take a typical
erroneous Republican attitude in the
1973 year when inflation was so high
they assumed that the inflation rate was
because of excessive demand and
therefore put into effect tight
constraint on the economy very high
interest rates which is typical also the
Republican administration try to
increase the tax payments by individuals
cut the tax payments by corporations I
would have done the opposite I think the
problem should have been addressed by
increasing productivity by having put
people back to work so they could
purchase more goods lower income taxes
on individuals perhaps raise them if
necessary on corporations in comparison
but mr. burns or in that respect made a
very serious mistake I would not want to
destroy the Independence of the Federal
Reserve Board but I do think we ought to
have a cohesive economic policy with it
at least a chairman of the Federal
Reserve Board and the president's terms
being the same and letting the Congress
of course be the third entity with with
independence subject only to the
President's veto President Ford your
response the chairman of the Federal
Reserve Board should be independent
fortunately he has been during
Democratic as well as Republican
administrations as a result in the last
two years we have had a responsible
monetary policy the Federal Reserve
Board indicated that the supply of money
would be
between four to four and a half and
seven and seven a half they have done a
good job in integrating the money supply
with the fiscal policy of the executive
and legislative branches of the
government it would be catastrophic if
the chairman of the Federal Reserve
Board became the tool of the political
party that was in power it's important
for our future economic security that
that job be non-political and separate
from the executive and the legislative
branches mrs. drew
mr. president the real problem with the
FBI and in fact all of the intelligence
agencies there are no real laws
governing them such laws as there are
tend to be vague and open-ended now you
have issued some executive orders but
we've learned that leaving these
agencies to executive discretion and
direction can get them and in fact the
country in a great deal of trouble one
president may be a decent man the next
one might not be so would what do you
think about trying to write in some more
protection by getting some laws
governing these agencies you are
familiar of course with the fact that I
am the first president in 30 years who
has reorganized the intelligence
agencies in the federal government the
CIA the Defense Intelligence Agency the
National Security Agency and the others
we've done that by executive order and I
think we've tightened it up we've
straightened out their problems that
developed over the last few years it
doesn't seem to me that it's needed or
necessary to have legislation in this
particular regard I have recommended to
the Congress however I'm sure you're
familiar with this legislation that
would make it very proper and in the
right way that the Attorney General
could go in and get the right for
wiretapping under security cases this
was an effort that was made by the
Attorney General and myself
working with the Congress but even in
this area where I think new legislation
would be justified the Congress has not
responded so I feel in that case as well
as in the reorganization of the
intelligence agencies as I've done we
have to do it by executive order and I'm
glad that we have a good director in
George Bush we have good executive
orders and the CIA and the DIA and NASA
or the NSA are now doing a good job
under proper supervision
governor Carter well one of the very
serious things that's happened in our
government in recent years and is
continued up until now there's a
breakdown in the trust among our people
in there
[Music]
in Philadelphia I have temporarily lost
the audio it is not a conspiracy against
Governor Carter or President Ford and
they will fix it as soon as possible
[Music]
this debate is now within about eight
minutes of its close and in spite of the
fact that this was under the auspices of
the League of Women Voters the pool
audio from Philadelphia has been lost
momentarily we hope to have it back any
minute
we don't know what's happened to it
again the pooled audio from the Walnut
Street Theatre in Philadelphia has been
lost we hope for the moment we are
needless to say trying to restore it do
not know what has happened to it both
candidates have lost a more or less
equal number of of their words I can't
hear them either so I don't know what it
is we're not hearing I think they have
stopped because they have been told the
sound has been lost
I think they've stopped talking whatever
happened we hope to have it fixed
shortly
I wish I could tell you more about it
but that's all I know
I might say a word here that planned to
say later when the debate was over and
in fact probably will say it again when
the debate is over
and it is that at 11:30 Eastern Time
it's just to say to a half hour from now
we will be back here with a special
program in which we will ask people in
the audience in the theater in
Philadelphia as they leave ask others in
the area and whoever we can find whose
views might be interesting what they
think about the debate who they think
won if they care to put it that way who
they think scored the most points John
Chancellor and other members of our news
staff are in Philadelphia and will be
ready with this as I say that's at 11:30
Eastern Time after a half-hour break for
the local news across the country and
we'll be back with that whatever happens
to the audio from the theater at this
time and again I don't know what's
happened except that we're not getting
it nobody is getting it it's the same on
it's the same everywhere so you needn't
change the channels looking for it it's
the same on all of them
it's still out right Doug canker is out
where is Doug he is in the lobby just
outside of of the hall Doug you can't
tell us what has happened there can you
David we don't know what's happened
we're as much surprised by what's going
on as you are they were talking and
suddenly they quit we all jumped up out
here to as you know this was a pool
arrangement one network responsible so
all we're doing is standing by just the
way you are we expect the debates to go
on of course immediately that audio is
assumed but what the problem is how long
it's going to take to fix it whether the
debate will have to be canceled or not
we just don't know we're isolated in the
car to here and the problem is even not
in the theater the problem is you know
is in the technical trucks undoubtedly
outside the auditorium it's a technical
problem it's not as someone says it's
not as conspiracy but how long is going
to take to fix it we just don't know you
don't have a screwdriver and a pair of
pliers on you Doug do you I do not David
no well we've seen them I can make a few
comments while we're waiting uh we have
seen a very lively debate it seems to me
so far it seems to me that both
candidates pretty much are saying the
same thing that they have been saying in
the early parts of these campaigns
making pretty much the same charges but
very tough tougher sometimes even rough
tonight both heavy on their facts to
back up their arguments as we knew
governor Carter intended to come here to
convince the American public that he
really did know the facts and had the
knowledge President Ford of course as
fact Phil from the knowledge of his
office President Ford has strongly
defended his economic policies in these
debates tonight he has pointed to the
fact that the improved economy is proof
of their wisdom he he did this very
forcefully mr. Carter came back disputed
this and in one of the tough tough
segments charges that President Ford is
insensitive to the plight of the
unemployed now excuse me
do we have audio back now we still do
not have audio back both candidates are
waiting they have been told that they're
on the air with a picture but they are
off the air with their voices to go on
tax reform President Ford announced
tonight that he will sign that new tax
bill all 1,500 pages of it even though
he said he was dissatisfied with some
provisions that were in it
mr. Carter called the present tax
structure a welfare program for the rich
and mr. Carter also talked and so
President Ford about the new federal
social programs mr. Carter said that he
would install the federal programs that
he had promised but that should it come
down to it a choice between those
programs being innovated or balancing
the budget that he would choose in favor
of balancing the budget President Ford
said any surplus from the federal
spending should go directly right back
to tax relief both men's outlined at
Great Lengths their plans to curb
unemployment mr. Carter said that he
believed his programs could bring
unemployment bounds of 3% within a few
years mr. Ford got into the Democratic
platform he said that if all the
proposals and the Democratic platform
were adopted it would create 60 new
programs which he said would cost a
hundred to two hundred billion dollars
more and mr. Carter immediately rejoined
by saying that Richard Nixon said the
same thing about programs proposed by
the Democrats 16 years ago when John F
Kennedy was the nominee the two men
discussed draft evaders and what the
programs there should be mr. Ford said
that he does not believe in any cross
the board pardons he said he believed
that the amnesty program which he put
forth was adequate and that he would not
change it and mr. Carter said that he
still would grant pardon and he insisted
that there is a difference between
pardon and amnesty the two men talked
about government reorganisation is some
link and Jimmy Carter as he has so often
done
this whole election year promise
forcefully that he would completely
reorganize the federal government if
he's elected and waste no time about it
president saying that he has looked into
the facts and figures of governor
Carter's record as governor of Georgia
and that the fact is that Governor
Carter increased the Georgia budget and
also increased the number of state
employees while he was there he also
said that the president governor of
Georgia governor Busbee found that the
Medicaid program in Georgia was in
governor busbee's words a shamble far as
the Democratic Congress is concerned
President Ford a Republican president
charged that the Democratic Congress had
not really been working with him Jimmy
Carter said other Republican presidents
have found it feasible and possible to
work with Democratic Congress's he
pointed out that Governor President
Eisenhower had done this and he said
that Richard Nixon he said for all of
his false I can't remember the exact
words was a strong leader and managed to
work with a Democratic Congress and
impose far fewer vetoes than President
Ford had imposed and then he got very
tough with momentarily with President
Ford he said I'm not a member of
Congress he said the Democratic Congress
has not under my control and so he said
you gonna blame me for that you can
blame me for us I'll blame you for
Watergate also we have here just stepped
out Ronald Nelson who is the
presidential press secretary he's
talking now so we'll listen in what's
going on in there I don't know any more
about it than you do duck I guess they
were down to the last few minutes and
the sounds suddenly cut out but I don't
know what the explanation is and so what
happens now will the debates continue or
I don't know we were listening upstairs
on the monitor and yet Newman wasn't
quite clear what was going to happen
either you have no contingency plan
obviously for such a thing to happen I
think you're supposed to be the one with
a contingency plan we don't know what
happened and I guess the president will
wait and let those putting on the
debates decide what to do will you're
sitting in there with some members of
the president's administration the
Secretary of Transportation Coleman
ambassador the United Nations scranton
you
yourself mr. heartland his speechwriter
what's your impression how do you think
your guys doing so far well we think we
talked we had a little time to talk
after the sound went off and we sort of
polled each other and everybody came to
the same conclusion and that is that it
was a clear-cut victory for the
president well I don't think anybody
would be surprised to hear of being
partisan you're saying that is this
debate tougher in your opinion than you
thought it would be some pretty tough
exchanges in there it seems to us well I
thought the president came across though
I agree the questions were tough and the
reporters were well-prepared and had
done a lot of research but I think the
president came across to us watching
anyhow as being in command of the
situation in control it seemed to me he
had the opportunity through the tough
questions to demonstrate experience his
background his knowledge and his ability
well the same thing I think also could
be said for governor Carter at least he
was spouting a lot of facts and figures
we didn't we haven't had all of these
debates yet mr. nesland at least we
haven't had the completion of this one
honey how much time did we get cut out
on 1215 minutes do you think that some
provision could be made for the viewing
public to hear what's over what what was
left out well the president said from
the very beginning Doug and the reason
that he wanted to do the debates in the
first place and the reason he wanted
them to be done at great length 90
minutes at a minimum was because he felt
the time was needed to explore issues in
depth and I think they were explored in
depth tonight thank you very much just
his press secretary ronald ness and now
over just on the other side to the left
is a man who I think will say that he
thinks that Jimmy Carter was as clear a
winner as mr. Nelson thinks mr. Ford was
and that is the Democratic Party
Chairman Robert Strauss who is already
talking so let's listen in to what he's
saying
I think it was a good night for for the
American people great night for Jimmy
Carter do you think that either man look
particularly nervous or realities
knowing that you think either one of
them look nervous early these I thought
this they both have their questions well
wait all right
just trying to get you in our picture -
I think that they both found the
questions well as I said I hope the
president look programmed
I thought the governor Carter looked at
the contrary look responsive and they
both feel the questions well I think
governor Carter clearly demonstrated
what he wanted to demonstrate an ability
to deal with issues facing this country
thank you very much thank you you
calling winners and losers Robert
Strauss you've obviously saying that you
think Jimmy Carter won this debate well
I said this I don't know if there were
two winners
I need the American public won because
they got a chance to see this debate see
these two men I also think they both
handle their questions well I think
governor Carter I understand we're back
with the debates scuse me Robert Strauss
now let's go back to the auditorium for
President Ford News Corp
I think I've got an anti NBC he's
watching eat
what we thought we had but we don't we
still don't know what's wrong nor where
we hoped we'd have it back by now but we
don't nor do I know if they will
continue the debates long enough to make
up for the lost time so this will be we
will all learn whatever we learn
together I don't know anything the
president and mr. Carter president mr.
Carter are waiting while whatever is
wrong wherever it is it is not in our
audio as you heard from Doug hacker just
outside the theater it's in the sound
coming from the rostrum there and we
don't know what the problem is but but
they are waiting
look at mom
we're getting a lot of miscellaneous
conversation from various places in the
hall but not the conversation we went
there to listen to which was the
president mr. Carter of course they it
was as you've heard a pretty lively
debate each one landing a few blows on
the other though I don't think anyone
was permanently disabled politically
speaking met much of the argument was
about what new programs might be put
into effect in the in the federal
establishment in the next term
presidential term for years what they
will cost and how they're going to be
paid for who's going to do the tax
paying in the next four years whether
the rich are going to pay it all the
middle class is going to pay it all or
if not them who it is I must say without
offering any opinion about winners and
losers I must say that question was not
was not fully answered perhaps some of
the audience might be left unsatisfied
on that score on the ones one question
was dealt with very firmly and
decisively and clearly was that of
evaders and deserters draft evaders and
military deserters Ford mr. Ford thought
the government should not go any further
than it has already gone in his
administration whereas Carter thinks it
should his point was that if Nixon could
be pardoned and why not the evaders Ford
said he gave them a chance to work their
way back into into American society some
accepted and some didn't
Doug canker is outside the theater and
can still be heard from though the
participants inside cannot Doug
yes David we are here with Jim Baker who
is President Ford's national campaign
manager mr. Baker let me ask you this
did things go pretty well according to
game plan tonight tell us how the
president prepared for this how hard did
he study and was he nervous when he went
out there I would be talking to 120
million people or however many i-i'll
ask talked to the president last night
Doug and he was not nervous at all he
was quite relaxed he was self-assured
and from looking at him as when he first
went on the stage it would be be my
judgment that he was quite relaxed and
and quite confident and quite
self-assured
he knew surprises tonight no surprises
no I think the President did an
excellent job I think he was in command
he was decisive and more than anything
else Doug I think he answered the
questions he gave them specific again
tell us about the preparation did did
President Ford sit back and have people
bounce questions to him it was sort of a
game plan way there was some of that yes
but he studied he worked hard he worked
on his preparation and he was well
prepared but sure it was there was some
of that and in the preparation did were
the questions that you tried to brain
brainstorm did any of them really coming
yeah there were some that that I think
that I think we anticipated very well
yes what do you think President for
Jimmy Carter of course is ahead in the
polls but what do you think President
Ford got out of agreeing to debate after
all he is the incumbent with all the
powers of office and Jimmy Carter wasn't
all that well known well that's very
true but Jimmy Carter was not all that
well known and his positions on the
issues were even less well known Doug
and that's that's one of the major
reasons that we wanted this debate was
so that Governor Carter would have to
take some positions on the issues and
they prevent the president's positions
are well known yeah well I we have a man
over here Jody Powell and I'm gonna come
in with you Leslie if you don't mind
Jody come over you can do us both okay
this is this is this is Jimmy Carter's
press secretary Jody Powell who's about
to go on the air with CBS but since
we're hearing this thing all together
I'll ask you how do you think your man
did tonight
well I think the real winner tonight was
American people I heard a good
discussion but I thought government
Carter was very impressive he
demonstrated a clear command of the
issues of the facts and specifics that
were involved in the in this in this
discussion and I guess if in the debate
between President Ford and the
Democratic Congress since the Congress
wasn't there
President Ford won in the debate between
the two presidential contenders is no
doubt in my mind that there was a clear
advantage all the way through in terms
of dealing directly the issue that's in
question
he was pretty tough on President Ford he
said that President Ford was insensitive
to the problems of the unemployed he
said that President Ford was going to
blame him for the Democratic Congress
did he ought to be blamed for being part
of the Watergate don't you make him
there sometimes happening he said that
that if the unjust charge was made that
he was responsible for all the acts with
the Democratic Congress but you've never
been apart off then perhaps it would be
nothing with a bit of tongue in cheek
appropriate to ask President Ford except
responsibility for the previous
administration he did not at all say I
did his part of Watergate how do you
think these debates compared to 1960 do
you think they were as interesting or as
decisive there is no way in the world
that I could compare from my point of
view these debates and to 1960 I was a
junior in high school when those Kennedy
Nixon debates took before as a matter of
fact there's some question about how
decisive those debates were then I don't
think elections are decided on on one
night it would suit me fine if the
election were decided on this night
house real quick assessment of how your
candidate did I thought he did very well
he
he showed a tremendous command of the
specifics of the details of the federal
government I think he made his point
directly the comparison between the
Republican rhetoric in their record and
the White House came through very
directly so I'm very happy Thank You mr.
Powell we've asked mr. Nelson he says he
doesn't know what went on do you know
why the mics went off
I don't but I'd certainly like to know
this of course took place right in the
middle of governor Carter's rebuttal and
I'd certainly like to know I assumed it
was a technical problem that sometimes
happens I asked that because it's been
my experience in a situation like this
that there's always a theory but held by
a lot of people that oh there was a
conspiracy to cut them off we have no
proof of that it was just simply a
technical foul off as far as we can
determine isn't it correct not only do
you have no proof but nobody's brought
up a subject there's no other family now
tell me this I think you know I think
perhaps it shows that everybody makes
mistakes every now and then he for the
net person okay let me ask let me ask
you this I want you to criticize the
network's of course because how much
consultation did you have and other
senior members of the carla staff had
with Jimmy Carter in preparation for
these debates was he anxious about it
how much rest did he get tonight was he
nervous and apprehensive is he coming I
know you're gonna say he was cool as a
cucumber okay
but tell us a little bit about what he
did what did he do the hour before he
came here I don't know he and he and the
mrs. Carter were together for four or
five hours this afternoon I didn't
bother him and neither did anybody else
so far as I know he's had two or three
days of rest I suppose the best way to
judge whether he was cool as a cucumber
or not was by his performance tonight
and I thought he handled himself very
well obviously as a would and he's
primarily had time to himself
we haven't engaged in in rehearsals and
we haven't done a lot of fancy gimmicks
we've given him time to do as he wished
primarily to study to read to reflect
and to think and
I think that paid off this evening mr.
Powell a lot has been written in this
last four or five days that Jimmy
Carter's campaign is losing steam by the
Playboy article the Illinois poll which
shows Gerald Ford running ahead a
general feeling well them on the press
that's covering Jimmy Carter that his
campaign may be losing a little steam
well fortunately for most campaigns the
election is held amongst American people
not on the day to day opinions of the
whatever they are of the press that
happens to be covering the campaign we
have run a very active and aggressive
campaign governor Carter has submitted
himself to cross-examinations four and
five times a day in the past 18 months
in those circumstances there's no way
that you can shield yourself from any
old chosen word here there we think that
in the long run the American people
would rather have a candidate and a
president who goes out and meets them
and takes the hard knocks and the tough
questions and answers the answers them
as responsibly and directly as you can
even though we might make mistake every
noon there thank you very much that's
Jody Powell who is the press secretary
for governor Carter and now I think back
to David Brinkley I gather the debate is
over is that right the the League of
Women Voters has decided not to go ahead
with any more of the debate it's now
11:15 in the East it was scheduled and
15 minutes ago it actually ended up
almost a half hour ago because of some
sound failure inside the hall we do not
know at the moment what happened or why
nor exactly where as I have said our
sound from the lobby of the theater and
the outside of the theater has been
normal and still is the problem is
somewhere inside the hall on or around
podium that's all we know which is not a
great deal so again the debate is over
and that's it we have had some
discussion of it we've heard from some
prominent Democrats and some prominent
Republicans each of whom thought his
side won and gave his reasons why our
plan is to return to the air in about a
half hour for a somewhat more extensive
we'll be back later and in the meantime
Catherine Mackin is talking to mrs.
Carter Catherine mrs. Carter you're just
wondering well everybody's been
following this sudden break up in the
debate and do you think this will have
any effect at all on what's going on do
you think cousin will just ride with the
waves here well I certainly think that
if we could have done anything about it
we would kept it going because she was
you know have any idea at all what he
was going to thank in summation I just
Blanche that it freaks I've been
campaigning old I have been in Texas all
day and got in late and I looked at it
plant said it but I don't know he'd have
to tell you that why you've been
campaigning I have you noticed whether
or not the interview in Playboy magazine
is having any effect on your husband's
campaign no I think people are putting
that in perspective we haven't heard
anything about it
tonight and this afternoon
and it was just such a complete
distortion of Ho Chi Minh lately out of
context and I think everybody in the
country is gonna read it because it's
been so much fun I see of attica and
when they do they would say that Jamie
was talking about his Christian religion
too
people that did not understand our
Christianity is it's a very good
overview when you were speaking with
mrs. Johnson this afternoon did you iron
things out with her for what your
husband said about President Johnson
very good mrs. Jones and she met me when
I flew into San Antonio yesterday and
then she received me at the library for
me at the library
thank you very much mrs. Jimmy Carter
now better David well we are told the
debate is ended but on the other hand
President Ford and governor Carter is
still there on the rostrum waiting all
we know about the breakdown and the
sound is that it's somewhere between the
microphones you see clipped to their
neckties and the network truck outside
the hall beyond that I can't go because
I don't know I don't think anyone knows
at the moment if anyone did he'd fix it
we don't know whether they I keep
telling you what I don't know which is a
great deal we don't know if they're
going to continue the bait at the debate
and wait wait for the sound to be fixed
Ted Newman is saying something no doubt
interesting but I haven't the faintest
idea what it is because they can't hear
it it occurred 27 minutes ago
the fault has been dealt with and we
want to thank President Ford and
governor Carter for being so patient and
understanding while this delay went on
we very much regret the technical
failure that lost the sound as it was
leaving this theater it occurred during
governor Carter's response to what would
have been and what was the last question
put to the candidates that question went
to President Ford it dealt with the
control of government intelligence
agencies governor Carter was making his
response and had very nearly finished it
he will conclude that response now after
which President Ford and governor Carter
will make their closing statements
governor there has been too much
government secrecy and not a not enough
respect for the personal privacy of
American citizens
it is now time for the closing
statements which are to be up to four
minutes long
governor Carter by the same toss of the
coin that directed the first question to
you you are to go first now well tonight
we've had a chance to talk a lot about
the past but I think it's time to talk
about the future our nation in the last
eight years has been divided as never
before it's a time for unity it's a time
to draw ourselves together to have a
president and a Congress that can work
together with mutual respect for a
change cooperating for a change in the
open for a change so the people can
understand our own government it's time
for government industry and labor
manufacturing agriculture education
other entities in our society to
cooperate there's a time for government
to understand and to cooperate with our
people for all time our American
citizens have been excluded
sometimes misled sometimes have been
lied to this is not compatible with the
purpose of our nation I believe in our
country it needs to be competent the
government needs to be well-managed
efficient economical we need to have a
government that's sensitive to our
people's needs to those who are poor who
don't have adequate health care who have
been cheated too long with our tax
programs who have been out of jobs whose
families have been torn apart we need to
restore the faith in the trust of the
American people in their own government
in addition of that we've suffered
because we haven't had leadership in
this administration you've got a
government of stalemate we've lost a
vision of what I country can and ought
to be this is not the America that we've
known in the past it's not the America
that we have to have in the future I
don't claim to know all the answers but
I've got confidence in my country our
economic strength is still there our
system of government in spite of Vietnam
Cambodia CIA Watergate there's still the
best system of government on earth and
the greatest resource of all
of the 215 million Americans who still
have within us the strength the
character the intelligence the
experience patriotism the idealism the
compassion the sense of brotherhood on
which we can rely in the future to
restore the greatness to our country we
ought to be excluded from our government
anymore we need a president who can go
in who derives his strength from the
people how the special interest nothing
our everything to you the people of this
country and I believe we can bind our
wounds that way that we can work
together and I believe it with we can
tap the tremendous untapped reservoir of
innate strength in this country the we
can once again have a government as good
as our people and let the world know
what we still know and hopeful that we
still live in the greatest and the
strongest and the best country on earth
performed on November 2nd all of you
will make a very very important decision
one of the major issues in this campaign
is trust a president should never
promise more than he can deliver and a
president should always deliver
everything that he's promised a
president can't be all things to all
people a president should be the same
thing to all people another issue in
this campaign governor Carter has
endorsed the Democratic platform which
calls for more spending bigger deficits
more inflation or more taxes governor
Carter has embraced the record of the
present Congress dominated by his
political party
it calls for more of the same hunger
Carter in his acceptance speech called
for more and more programs which means
more and more government
I think the real issue in this campaign
and that what you must decide on
November 2nd his whether you should vote
for his promises or my performance in
two years in the White House on the 4th
of July we had a wonderful 200th
birthday for our great country it was a
superb occasion it was a glorious day in
the first century of our nation's
history our forefathers gave us the
finest form of government in the history
of mankind in the second century of our
nation's history our forefathers
developed the most productive industrial
nation in the history of the globe our
third century should be the century of
individual freedom for all our two
hundred and fifteen million Americans
today and all that join us in the last
few years
government has gotten bigger and bigger
industry has gotten larger and larger
labor unions have gotten bigger and
bigger and our children have been the
victims of mass education we must make
this next century the century of the
individual we should never forget that a
government big enough to give us
everything we want is a government big
enough to take from us everything we
have the individual worker and the
plants throughout the United States
should not be a small cog in a big
machine the member of a labor union must
have his rights strengthened and
broadened and our children in their
education should have an opportunity to
improve themselves based on their
talents and their abilities my mother
and father
during the Depression worked very
to give me an opportunity to do better
in our great country your mothers and
fathers did the same thing for you and
others Betty and I have worked very hard
to give our children a brighter future
in the United States our beloved country
you and others in this great country
have worked hard and done a great deal
to give your children and your
grandchildren the blessings of a better
America I believe we can all work
together to make the individuals in the
future have more and all of us working
together can build a better America
Thank You President Ford Thank You
governor Carter our thanks also to the
questioners and to the audience in this
theater we much regret the technical
failure that caused a 28 minute delay in
the broadcast of the debate we believe
how